README.md, before:

# Pascal in Truffle

This project implements a subset of Pascal language by Niklaus Wirth from Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zürich (aka ETH Zürich).

It uses Oracle's [Truffle](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/oracle-labs/program-languages/overview/index-2301583.html) to achieve higher performance by allowing just-in-time compilation of the interpreted Pascal code.

## Dependencies

- [GraalVM JDK 0.20](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/oracle-labs/program-languages/downloads/index.html)

GraalVM JDK must be installed in the `graalvm` directory under the root of the project.

## Build

Run mvn package in the pascal-truffle directory.

JDK_HOME must be set to graalvm, then run mvn package.
	
	mvn package

## Run

	./run-pascal benchmark/bubble.pas -time
	
The code above runs bubble sort on 10000 numbers and prints the time needed to execute the code (without time needed to start the Java Virtual Machine).  
There is one another benchmark in the directory. 

Code can be entered using the standard input as well.

## Performance Tests

During the development, some of the Truffle features were incrementally added. 
The respective versions are [tagged](https://github.com/chovanecm/pascal-truffle/releases) and described in the repository.

### Versions
- FreePascal: program compiled using fpc
- v0.2 - pascal-truffle with the Truffle API and no optimisations. Often uses "slow operations" (interpreter mode)
- v0.3 - pascal-truffle - avoiding slow operations by preallocating FrameSlots
- v0.4 - pascal-truffle - uses RepeatingNode to speed loops up.

The following table shows the time needed to execute respective programs.

| Program name   | FreePascal (s) | pascal-truffle v0.2(.1)  (s)| pascal-truffle v0.3  (s) | pascal-truffle v0.4 (s) |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Collatz  | 2,1  | 168  | 90  | 3,15  |
| Bubble  | 0,225  | 30  | 19,5  | 5,04  |


## Acknowledgements
- A big thanks to Karel Rank, who allowed me to use his older work, [Pascal Parser](https://github.com/karl82/pascal-interpreter), as my starting point.

Commit message:

Add Features section to README

README.md, after:

# Pascal in Truffle

This project implements a subset of Pascal language by Niklaus Wirth from Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zürich (aka ETH Zürich).

It uses Oracle's [Truffle](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/oracle-labs/program-languages/overview/index-2301583.html) to achieve higher performance by allowing just-in-time compilation of the interpreted Pascal code.

## Features

The language (should) support:

- only the "main" procedure (no user-defined functions or procedures)
- integer, real, boolean and string variables
- static 1-D arrays of integers, real, boolean and string defined by `[from..to]` range.
- write and writeln (no read, no readln)!!!
- +, -, *, /, div
- if, while, for ... to and for ... downto

## Dependencies

- [GraalVM JDK 0.20](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/oracle-labs/program-languages/downloads/index.html)

GraalVM JDK must be installed in the `graalvm` directory under the root of the project.

## Build

Run mvn package in the pascal-truffle directory.

JDK_HOME must be set to graalvm, then run mvn package.
	
	mvn package

## Run

	./run-pascal benchmark/bubble.pas -time
	
The code above runs bubble sort on 10000 numbers and prints the time needed to execute the code (without time needed to start the Java Virtual Machine).  
There is one another benchmark in the directory. 

Code can be entered using the standard input as well.

## Performance Tests

During the development, some of the Truffle features were incrementally added. 
The respective versions are [tagged](https://github.com/chovanecm/pascal-truffle/releases) and described in the repository.

### Versions
- FreePascal: program compiled using fpc
- v0.2 - pascal-truffle with the Truffle API and no optimisations. Often uses "slow operations" (interpreter mode)
- v0.3 - pascal-truffle - avoiding slow operations by preallocating FrameSlots
- v0.4 - pascal-truffle - uses RepeatingNode to speed loops up.

The following table shows the time needed to execute respective programs.

| Program name   | FreePascal (s) | pascal-truffle v0.2(.1)  (s)| pascal-truffle v0.3  (s) | pascal-truffle v0.4 (s) |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Collatz  | 2,1  | 168  | 90  | 3,15  |
| Bubble  | 0,225  | 30  | 19,5  | 5,04  |


## Acknowledgements
- A big thanks to Karel Rank, who allowed me to use his older work, [Pascal Parser](https://github.com/karl82/pascal-interpreter), as my starting point.
